Many people think that zoos should no longer be part in the modern society and only protected animals should be kept in zoos many children do not understand that the animals are not behaving as they would in the wild.

Animals show signs of psychotic behaviour in zoos when they start acting different because of enclosures being too small for the animals. Many enclosures in 13 of the 25 selected zoos lacked the appropriate facilities, fixed furnishings, environmental complexity and enrichment that would permit and encourage the opportunity for animals to rest, seek shelter or privacy, exercise and carry out normal behaviours.

Indonesia

Many zoos in Indonesia are neglecting and being cruel to animals, a worldwide animal charity has discovered. Now the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) has written a disturbing report after visiting 10 zoos, which are big tourist attractions in the country.

Half the animals were starving and didn't have enough water. And many were forced to entertain visitors too.  Several animals had died from eating sweets and ice cream thrown by the public. Some had even been given cigarettes. One Orangutan and baby were living in a filthy cage no bigger than a telephone box. Animals were chained to their cages and couldn't move properly.

In one zoo in Bali, seven lions were found with sores full of maggots, in cramped cages with no shelter from rain. At another zoo, three elephants had their legs chained so they couldn't move. Now WPSA, working with an Indonesian animal charity, want zoos to be licensed and controlled more to stop the cruelty in these zoos.

Breading Programs in Zoos

Many zoos breed endangered animals to repopulate there species. Przewalski’s horse, golden lion tamarind, Arabian Oryx and Patula Snail have all been saved by zoos because their breeding programs has worked.

Animals form a good part of nature. Therefore must be protected and preserved to maintain the right balance of nature. More zoos should be developed in Indian and across the globe to save the animals from illegal poaching and trading. It is also the ideal way to bring people, particularly the children close to nature and to the animal world.

