Innocence
Honore de Balzac

By the double crest of my fowl, and by the rose lining of my sweetheart's
slipper! By all the horns of well-beloved cuckolds, and by the virtue of
their blessed wives! the finest work of man is neither poetry, nor painted
pictures, nor music, nor castles, nor statues, be they carved never so
well, nor rowing, nor sailing galleys, but children.
Understand me, children up to the age of ten years, for after that they
become men or women, and cutting their wisdom teeth, are not worth
what they cost; the worst are the best. Watch them playing, prettily and
innocently, with slippers; above all, cancellated ones, with the household
utensils, leaving that which displeases them, crying after that which
pleases them, munching the sweets and confectionery in the house,
nibbling at the stores, and always laughing as soon as their teeth are cut,
and you will agree with me that they are in every way lovable; besides
which they are flower and fruit--the fruit of love, the flower of life. Before
their minds have been unsettled by the disturbances of life, there is
nothing in this world more blessed or more pleasant than their sayings,
which are naive beyond description. This is as true as the double chewing
machine of a cow. Do not expect a man to be innocent after the manner
of children, because there is an, I know not what, ingredient of reason in
the naivety of a man, while the naivety of children is candid, immaculate,
and has all the finesse of the mother, which is plainly proved in this tale.
Queen Catherine was at that time Dauphine, and to make herself
welcome to the king, her father-in-law, who at that time was very ill
indeed, presented him, from time to time, with Italian pictures, knowing
that he liked them much, being a friend of the Sieur Raphael d'Urbin and
of the Sieurs Primatice and Leonardo da Vinci, to whom he sent large
sums of money. She obtained from her family--who had the pick of these
works, because at that time the Duke of the Medicis governed Tuscany-a precious picture, painted by a Venetian named Titian (artist to the
Emperor Charles, and in very high flavour), in which there were portraits
of Adam and Eve at the moment when God left them to wander about the

terrestrial Paradise, and were painted their full height, in the costume of
the period, in which it is difficult to make a mistake, because they were
attired in their ignorance, and caparisoned with the divine grace which
enveloped them--a difficult thing to execute on account of the colour, but
one in which the said Sieur Titian excelled. The picture was put into the
room of the poor king, who was then ill with the disease of which he
eventually died. It had a great success at the Court of France, where
everyone wished to see it; but no one was able to until after the king's
death, since at his desire it was allowed to remain in his room as long as
he lived.
One day Madame Catherine took with her to the king's room her son
Francis and little Margot, who began to talk at random, as children will.
Now here, now there, these children had heard this picture of Adam and
Eve spoken about, and had tormented their mother to take them there.
Since the two little ones at times amused the old king, Madame the
Dauphine consented to their request.
"You wished to see Adam and Eve, who were our first parents; there they
are," said she.
Then she left them in great astonishment before Titian's picture, and
seated herself by the bedside of the king, who delighted to watch the
children.
"Which of the two is Adam?" said Francis, nudging his sister Margot's
elbow.
"You silly!" replied she, "to know that, they would have to be dressed!"
This reply, which delighted the poor king and the mother, was mentioned
in a letter written in Florence by Queen Catherine.
No writer having brought it to light, it will remain, like a sweet flower, in a
corner of these Tales, although it is no way droll, and there is no other
moral to be drawn from it except that to hear these pretty speeches of
infancy one must beget the children

