For thousands of years humans have kept animals for their meat, milk, eggs, wool, hides, bones, and much more.

One of the very first species to be domesticated was the goat. Around 10,000 BC, ancient farmers began herding wild goats, to be used primarily for their rich milk and lean meat, but also for their hair, hides and bones. Today, there are over three hundred breeds of goats in the world, most of which are thought to have derived from the bezoar, a wild goat which is native to the Greek isles and numerous Middle Eastern countries.

Many modern day goat breeds are bred chiefly for milk production. These breeds are called dairy goats. All female goats (does) produce milk to feed their young (kids), but dairy goats are bred specifically to produce large volumes of milk, much more than their kids would be able to consume.

The most common dairy goat breeds in the United States today include standard breeds, miniature breeds, and cross breeds. The six standard breeds recognized in the US are the Nubian, Alpine, LaMancha, Saanen, Oberhasli, and Toggenburg. The Nubian is a large, long eared breed which originated in Africa.

The beautifully colored Alpines trace their roots back to the French and Swiss Alps. LaManchas, with their odd-looking, extremely short external ear flaps find their ancestry in ancient Spanish breeds, while the regal white Saanens (often called the “Holsteins” of the dairy goat world for their extremely high milk production), bay-colored Oberhaslis and beautiful chocolate-and-white Toggenburgs come from various regions in Switzerland.

The main miniature dairy goat breed is the Nigerian Dwarf, originally brought from Africa to feed large cats in zoos. They soon became popular pets, and eventually dairy animals. The Nigerian Dwarf’s milk has very high butterfat content, rendering it excellent for cheese and butter making. One common practice is that of crossing the standard breeds with the Nigerian Dwarfs, creating a miniature version of the standard breed.

Although, in the United States, goats are not nearly as numerous as cows, goat’s milk is the most widely consumed milk in most countries of the world.  This is due to the fact that they require much less living space than a cow, and are much hardier.

Goat’s milk is very high in vitamins, minerals, enzymes, proteins and fatty acids, making it extremely beneficial to the body. It is also much easier to digest than cow’s milk and many people with lactose intolerance or dairy allergies can drink raw goat’s milk without any adverse effects. Goat’s milk is used to make delicious cheeses, yogurt, ice cream and many other dairy products.

After years of masterful breeding, the rough, wild goats of yesteryear have developed into beautiful, functional, versatile animals.

The dairy goat has proven itself again and again; with the dairy farmer selling hundreds of gallons of milk every week, the showman, who breeds exclusively for the most quality, ribbon-winning animals, and the small homesteader, wishing to provide delicious, nutritious milk to his family.

