Man has gained a lot from education in his/her life, when it comes to education this means we are talking about awareness, knowledge and some experiences.

We do respect education in our lives as it opens up the minds to different prospective that help us to cope up with the continuous changing environment. Education balances between the practices and knowledge, and as we have mentioned before coping up with multiple changes in our lives that have to be handled based on others experience or some level of basic knowledge about different aspects related to the same subject.

We respect education in our lives also because it's considered to the source of communication and sharing knowledge between different members in the same society and other foreign societies as I am one of the believers that man always tend to share his knowledge with other humans so that this knowledge can spread all around and help mankind to stay and continue in this life till the end, education is the channel where man can share and communicate with others to know his habits, costumes, and attitude to help others to understand the way they should communicate accordingly.

Education was always treated as a measure for success for any individual...yes... individuals nowadays can obtain a job according to the type and levels of educations they have received, and this education is usually measured by examinations that translates this concept (education) into meaningful numbers that could be easy to compare with other umbers, so we can say that the education is considered to be the critical success factor for the general success of an individual, where any individual have to acquire it in order to be considered as successful, at the same time examining and exam results could be the key performance indicator that is used to measure the educational level.

Education and the economy have a strong relationship on the other hand on both levels the individual level as well as the society level. For individuals people tend to get high level of education and they spend a lot of money on that in order to get much more money in the future to maintain their livings and their families.

From the society perspective, education normally helps in economy growth, as education will lead to more research and development studies which is essential for new inventions that are important to create new markets globally that depends on the countries goods and services and those new innovations brings more foreign currencies to the economy which will grow up the economy especially in the developing countries that requires foreign currencies to enhance their economic situation. (ref. 1)

There has been many educational techniques since the idea of education arise  long time ago, but the most common methodology is called Blooms Taxonomy, which came around back in the 1950s by Benjamin Bloom, who have classified the different objectives of education into about Six taxonomies which are:

1. Knowledge, 2. Comprehension, 3. Application, 4. Analysis, 5. Synthesis, 6. Evaluation

1. Knowledge:

Getting familiar with different terminologies, and basic concepts, where you can call previously learned concepts and definitions. Knowledge stage is a very important objective of education as it will be the solid ground for all the coming phases.

2. Comprehension:

Here we start to make sense of all facts and believes, and start to interpret them and explain how do we feel of what do we understand about any of the principles that we know.

3. Application:

Start to resolve different situations and cases according to the acquired knowledge and principles

5. Synthesis:

Performing and applying new conditions on an existing situation that could change the overall performance of that activity, also synthesis could include the production a project plan for implementing a certain project.

6. Evaluation:

Based on the analysis and trying different alternatives we will reach to setting up an opinion or idea about any matter, we also will be able to judge that idea accordingly, and here where the wisdom comes. (ref. 2)

All the previously mentioned taxonomies are to be performed through certain means, and nowadays technology plays a vital role in education and courses delivery, nobody can deny the role of personal computers and how it's useful for those who study to perform their own assignments etc. who also can deny the huge role of the internet in our lives not only in education, internet is one of technologies that facilitates the education process to its most, think about getting a book to do your research or studies, today you don't have to go in circles and ask people here and there in order to bring you a book while with a click of a button you can download it and start your work.

Using both technology and internet together also contributed into facilitating the means of education delivery itself, and a good example for that is the distance learning concept, where you can do your studies and attend classes and get you degrees all online, you only need a PC and an internet connection to do so, like the wonderful Masters & Doctorate programs that is offered by AIU. (ref. 3)

Since education starts from the individual, then it will affect the whole society and also the whole world, the main reason for education is for individuals, societies, and countries to achieve their own goals and/or objectives, those goals may include: economic, scientific, industrial, social, and many more objectives.

There has always been a strong relationship between the economy, science, industry, and society, we can say that all dependent on each other, and as we have mentioned earlier that science may lead or enhances the research and development for a certain country, then innovation will start to contribute to raise the economy growth over time. The science will make us in need to create different industries in order to apply those inventions on the ground.

Social achievements of education is also important for any individual, and maybe it's one of his/her priorities, as I have mentioned previously that man always seeks communication and sharing with other people from the same community and from others as well, man cannot live in isolation, and the main reason for that in my view is to learn and learn more from others, and to teach others at the same time.

So it's all about sharing knowledge, and this sharing causes a strong self satisfaction feeling for any individual, so whenever you teach somebody any subject you feel yourself as if you have a very sacred message that has to be delivered to the whole world, it is education then, education helps to achieve our goals and objectives what so ever.