Essay on the Salient Features of Gandhism are as follows:

1. Truth:

Truth is the most cardinal principle of Gandhism. Mahatma Gandhi was a worshipper of truth. He believed that there is no good higher than truth. "Truth is God and God is Truth." He searched for truth throughout his life. He named his auto-biography, 'My Experiments with Truth'. He achieved many successes by following the path of truth. He did not give up the path of truth even in times of failures.

He had to bear many sufferings for truth.

He was of the opinion that a truthful person will not harm his opponents but will make them friends. He always considered truth as the ideal, and continuously strived for its achievement. He firmly believed that only a society based on truth can become an ideal society. Truth and truthful living constitute the guiding principle of Gandhism philosophy.

2. Non-violence:

Next to truth, Mahatma Gandhi expressed full faith in non-violence. Infact, non-violence and truth were to him two sides of the same coin. A seeker of truth always follows the path of non-violence. Non-violence means not to harm any person, not even to one's opponent in any way. Gandhiji was against the propagation of violence in one's thought, words, actions and deeds. A follower of non-violence does not torture others through his words, actions and deeds. He tries to change the heart of others by bearing sufferings for himself.

According to Gandhiji non-violence is of three types:

(i) Non-violence of the Brave:

It is the best form of non-violence. Here non-violence is not adopted under compulsion. The basis of the non-violence of the brave is morality and inner strength. Only a brave person can practise non-violence. This type of non-violence can achieve very good results.

(ii) Non-violence based on Expediency:

It is the non- violence of the weak. It is used as a matter of expediency or utility. It is the result of weakness and helplessness and not of moral conviction. It is used for the fulfillment of selfish interests. This form of non-violence can lead to a limited success only.

(iii) Non-violence of the Coward:

The non-violence of the coward is the worst form of non-violence Cowardice and non-violence can never really go together. A coward does not face danger, he runs away from it. Mahatma Gandhi would prefer violence instead of accepting the non-violence of the coward. He holds the view that if there is violence in one's mind it is good to use it openly rather than to practise non-violence to hide one's impotence. A violent man can become non-violent one day but there is no hope for a coward.

Gandhism favours non-violence of the brave. It always advocates the use of non-violence for securing the objectives dictated by Truth. Now the United Nations has decided to celebrate each year 2nd October (Birthday of Mahatma Gandhi) as World Non-violence Day. It is a tribute to Mahatma Gandhi's love for Non-violence.

3. Satyagraha:

Mahatma Gandhism advocates dependence upon Satyagraha as the means to resist evil. It is a moral weapon which is based on soul force and not physical force. Satyagraha means, 'Clinging to the Truth'. "Satyagraha is the vindication of truth, not by infliction of suffering on the opponent but on one'- own self. Satyagraha is nothing but Tapsya for truth.' Satyagraha is a moral weapon with which one can successful meet the challenge evil, injustice, exploitation and untruthfulness.

4. Satyagrah and Non-Cooperation:

Gandhiji was of the opinion that oppression and exploitation were possible only through co-operation given by those who were being oppressed. When the people decide to refuse to co-operate with an unjust Government the unjust system sooner or later, comes to an end. Non-violent non-cooperation can even bend the absolute power of a despot.

When negotiations and petitions fail, the evil can be resisted only through non-cooperation. Even a despot government cannot continue in rule without the cooperation of the people. When the people adopt the path of non-cooperation after shedding all fear, the despot also becomes helpless, and he has to bow before the public. Gandhiji led the struggle for freedom by sing non-violent non-cooperation means.

Non-co-operation can assume three different forms:

(i) Stoppage of work:

The aim of the stoppage of work is to arouse consciousness in the minds of the people and the government against evil.

(ii) Social boycott:

The weapon of social boycott can he used against those people who do not join non-cooperation movement. But it does not mean a denial of the use of social service to the persons boycotted. Social boycott also does not mean insulting of the cooperator by the non-cooperator.

(iii) Picketing:

The aim of picketing is not to check the entry of a person to that place which is picketed but to arouse public indignation against the wrong doers.

(iv) Strike:

Strike is another mode of Satyagraha. The objective of strike is stoppage of work to register protest against the government for focusing the attention of the public on specific public issues. But the strike has to be voluntary and non-violent.

Gandhiji was also against repeated strikes because he felt that these will reduce its efficacy. Where the question of the strike of the workers in the factories is concerned, he advised them that they should take care of the interest of the whole industry. Whenever they may go on strike, they should limit their opposition to injustice, corruption, inefficiency and undue greed of the owners. The strike should always be totally non-violent.

(v) Fasting:

Fasting is another effective method of Satyagraha. According to Gandhiji, "the best and most acceptable method is that of fasting." It can be used for self-purification, for opposing injustice, and for changing the hearts of the wrong doers. It is a means to arouse public opinion by self-suffering. But fasting can prove effective against injustice only when it is undertaken by one who is a noble, spiritual, self-disciplined and faithful person. An indolent and indiscipline person has no right to practice it.

(vi) Civil-Disobedience:

It is the most drastic form of Satyagraha.