Gymnastics is a set of physical activities that require great physical strength along with stamina, agility, endurance and coordination as well as balance.

Gymnastics is encouraged as a physical activity amongst children who are able to tumble and perform stretching and bending on different equipments used during the acts. This not only enhances their physical performance but also helps them build social and cognitive skills.

Gymnastics has gained popularity as a sport which keeps you active and fit and is also enjoyable and improves focus. It is easiest for children to learn gymnastic skills in early childhood as their flexibility and acquisition are at its peak.

The key quality that gymnastics imbibes in children or in any gymnasts who take up the challenge of learning gymnastics is improved self-confidence. Self-confidence is gained with each trick and tactful skill performed on beams and bars. This reflects in other areas of their lives. Physical strength and power are also built with gymnastics.

Gymnasts are able to build good overall body strength because upper body and legs are equally involved in this sport. Flexibility is endowed in children with improved muscle strength and balance as each body part gets worked out and a range of movements in different positions are carried out. This promotes mental, physical and emotional wellbeing of children who learn to carry out hard technical positions in short period of time.

Fitness and body control are also achieved through gymnastics. Children who undergo training gymnastics understand that for their bodies to function well and to carry out gymnastics in routine they must give proper rest and nutrition to their bodies. Body control comes to their internal self at an early age and also puts them at reduced risk of obesity and other health disorders that affect children with sedentary lifestyle and unhealthy eating habits. Gymnasts maintain a proper body alignment with the type of activities they perform and also correct posture essential for good health.

Besides numerous health benefits that come with gymnastics, it is also a unique and excellent means to educate social values and develop qualities of teamwork, healthy competition and dedication. Gymnasts who indulge in regular practice master fundamental skills of patience, planning and perseverance.

People may find it hard to acquire and practice these qualities which come naturally to regular gymnasts. Cognitive development becomes faster as children have better spatial awareness and can imagine better that improves their thinking and problem solving ability.

Gymnasts are more aware of their relationships with others, keep positive attitude towards their bodies and have trust in their abilities. They are more mannered and have co-operative attitude towards other people. Their increased agility and coordination keeps them charged to do better in every aspect of life. They also enjoy relaxing to the fullest after enjoying a routine of gymnastic practice.

Gymnastics brings a sense of self-fulfillment and ability to face challenges with positive attitude in people involved in this sport.

Fitness and physical health apart, gymnastics is fun and better than leisure time activities like watching Television, playing games on computer etc. that do not involve any physical activity. Gymnastics is an exercise for mind, body and the soul which keeps you healthy and happy and helps you achieve set goals and learn life skills.