In its social dimension Justice means the absence of socially privileged class or classes in the society as well as no discrimination against any citizen on grounds of caste, creed, colour, religion, sex or place of birth. Indian state accepts the securing social justice as a cardinal goal. It stands for elimination of social exploitation on any ground.

A former CJ of India PB Gajendragadkar says, "By social justice we mean to abolish social inequalities, and to provide equal opportunities to everybody is social life."

Absence of discrimination on the basis of caste, religion place of birth, sex, creed and provision for equal and adequate opportunities to all for development constitute the core of the concept of Social Justice. Equality of all classes of people and equality between men and women in all aspects of social relations is the ideal.

1. In its Part IV, the Constitution gives a directive to the state for promoting the welfare of all the people by securing a social order characterised by social, economic and political justice.

2. The constitution grants right to equality to all persons.It includes:

(?) Equality before law. All are equally under law.

(b) No discrimination against any one on grounds of caste, colour, creed, religion, sex or place of birth

(c) Equality of opportunities to all in matters of public appointments.

(d) Abolition of untouchability and making it a crime punishable under law.

(e) Abolition of Titles. Elimination of unnatural and artificial divisions in society.

3. Right to freedom to pursue any business trade or profession or career.

4. End of exploitation, prohibition of Beggar, human trade and bonded labour.

5. Special protections for weaker sections of society—women, children and persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled tribes and OBCs.

6. Special protection of the interest of minorities by granting to them the right to follow their cultures, languages and traditions, and the right to organise and run their educational institutions.

7. Now a decision has been taken for the reservation of seats in educational and professional institutions for the benefit of people belonging to OBCs, SCs, STs and Minorities.

8. Right to religious freedom to all and equality of all religions in society.

9. Special efforts for the empowerment of women.

10. Freedom of action for social service associations and non-governmental organisations to pursue the objective of social reforms by eliminating social evils and unhealthy customs and traditions.

11. Special drives for spreading women education, education of children (It is now a fundamental right of the children to receive education) and adult education.

12. Use of mass media for providing non-formal education aimed at strengthening the cause of social justice, social equality and social awareness.

13. Several special commissions have been working in India for monitoring and supervising the progress of special rights and opportunities granted to several sections/groups of the people. There is a National Commission for Minorities, National Commission for Women, National Commission for Backward Classes National Commission for Scheduled Castes, and National Commission for Scheduled Tribes. These commission have to monitor the progress of social welfare laws, policies and programmes for their respective groups of people.

Through these devices the India is seeking to ensure conditions for promoting Social Justice. The state has been given several directives to ensure social justice. Now right to education has been granted to all children up to the age of 14 years. It has been made a fundamental duty of the parents to provide education to their children. Empowerment of women is being pursued systematically.

Securing of Social Justice for all sections of Indian society through rapid socio-economic reforms and development has been our priority. The people of India must get organised in non-governmental organisations and form self-help groups for achieving the objective of Social Justice.